KEP-3015: PreferSameNode traffic distribution (#5140)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/3015-prefer-same-node/README.md

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP extends KEP-4444 `TrafficDistribution` with a new value,
`PreferSameNode`, indicating traffic for a service should
preferentially be routed to endpoints on the same node as the client.

(This is the third attempt at this feature, which was previously
suggested as [`internalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`] and [Node-level
topology].)

[`internalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3016
[Node-level topology]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3293

## Motivation

### Goals

- Allow configuring a service so that connections will be delivered to
  a local endpoint when possible, and a remote endpoint if not.

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### DNS

As a cluster administrator, I plan to run a DNS pod on each node, and

> would like DNS requests from other pods to always go to the local DNS

Reviewer: Above you state “preferentially” and here you state always. Probably just wording, does this flag guarantee traffic will always be on the same node?

Author: There's some discussion in #4931 about exactly what "Prefer" implies... if it means "definitely unless there are no preferred endpoints" or if it means "probably unless there's a good reason not to". It is not totally clear. At any rate, the "Prefer" here means the same thing as the "Prefer" in "PreferClose" does.

Reviewer 2: I think the wiggle room is justified.  We've made the mistake of being to prescriptive without a good corpus of implementations in the past.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP extends KEP-4444 `TrafficDistribution` with a new value,
`PreferSameNode`, indicating traffic for a service should
preferentially be routed to endpoints on the same node as the client.

> (This is the third attempt at this feature, which was previously

Reviewer 2: Demonstrating both our willingness to admit we were wrong, and our relentless pursuit of excellence! :)

suggested as [`internalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`] and [Node-level
topology].)

[`internalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3016
[Node-level topology]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3293

## Motivation

### Goals

- Allow configuring a service so that connections will be delivered to

>   a local endpoint when possible, and a remote endpoint if not.

Reviewer 3: Is there a possibility of allowing `PreferSameNode` to fall back to `PreferSameZone`, and `PreferSameZone` to fall back to any?

I can see that as useful in my environment, but it also increases the complexity of how a user needs to define what they want.

Reviewer 2: I think that is exactly what is implied

### Non-Goals

N/A

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### DNS

As a cluster administrator, I plan to run a DNS pod on each node, and
would like DNS requests from other pods to always go to the local DNS
pod, for efficiency. However, if no local DNS pod is available, DNS
should just go to a remote pod instead so it keeps working. There
should never be enough DNS traffic to overload any one endpoint, so
it's safe to use a TrafficDistribution mode that doesn't worry about
endpoint overload.

### Risks and Mitigations

> This is similar to the existing `PreferClose` mode (possibly to be

Reviewer 2: I think this should be a part of this KEP.  Add new name, deprecate (but retain) the `PreferClose` alias.

Author: This KEP adds a new field to `discoveryv1.EndpointHints` so it needs 3 releases in alpha to deal with potential apiserver skew, right? So I think it would be better to do `PreferSameZone` as an update to KEP-4444 rather than tying it to this.

renamed `PreferSameZone`) and has the same sorts of risks.
We only use the new traffic distribution mode if the user explicitly
requests it, and in that case, the user is responsible for ensuring
that clients and servers are distributed in a way such that the
traffic distribution mode makes sense.

## Design Details

We will add a new field to `discoveryv1.EndpointHints`:

```golang
// EndpointHints provides hints describing how an endpoint should be consumed.
type EndpointHints struct {
        ...

	// forNodes indicates the node(s) this endpoint should be targeted by.
	// +listType=atomic
	ForNodes []string `json:"forNodes,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,name=forNodes"`

> }

Reviewer 3: Nit: the triple-backtick on line 128 isn't closed again here

When updating EndpointSlices, if the EndpointSlice controller sees a
service with `PreferSameNode` traffic distribution, then for each
endpoint in the slice, it will add a `ForNodes` hint including the
name of the endpoint's node. (The field is an array for future
extensibility, but initially it will always have either 0 or 1
elements.) In addition, it will set the `ForZones` hint as it would
with `TrafficDistribution: PreferClose`, to allow older service
proxies to fall back to at least same-zone behavior.

> When kube-proxy sees an Endpoint with the `ForNodes` hint set, it will

Reviewer 2: This is unclear.  I read what you wrote as:

```
usableEndpoints := []Endpoint{}

for _, e := range endpoints {
    if e.ForNodes != nil {
        if lookup(e.ForNodes, this.nodeName) {
            usableEndpoints = append(usableEndpoints, e)
        }
    } else {
        usableEndpoints = append(usableEndpoints, e)
    }
}

return usableEndpoints
```

The key being if all endpoints have `ForNodes` and none of those are mine, I have no endpoints.  I think you meant to also say "If there are no endpoints for this node, then endpoints for this zone are used." right?

```
sameNodeEndpoints := []Endpoint{}
sameZoneEndpoints := []Endpoint{}

for _, e := range endpoints {
    if lookup(e.ForNodes, this.nodeName) {
        sameNodeEndpoints = append(usableEndpoints, e)
    }
    if lookup(e.ForZones, this.zoneName) {
        sameZoneEndpoints = append(sameZoneEndpoints, e)
    } 
}

if len(sameNodeEndpoints) > 0 {
    return sameNodeEndpoints
}
if len(sameZoneEndpoints) > 0 {
    return sameZoneEndpoints
}
return endpoints
```

Author: Right.

No.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

An initial rollout cannot fail and won't impact already-running
workloads, because at the time of the initial rollout, there cannot
already be any `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameNode` services.

A rollback has reasonable fallback behavior (as with downgrades), and
a re-rollout just updates the behavior of existing `PreferSameNode`
services in the expected way.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

There are no metrics that would inform anyone that the feature was
failing, but since the feature is opt-in, individual users can simply
stop using the feature if it is not working for them.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

No

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

By checking if any Service has `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameNode`.

> ###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

Reviewer 4: if the feature is working you'll see a new field in the EndpointSlices `ForNodes` populated, in addition to that they need to do the manual inspection you indicate to validate that the traffic directed to those endpoints only goes to those nodes

Author: That only tells you that _half_ of the feature is working. Notably, that would happen even if you still had an old kube-proxy, but the old kube-proxy would ignore the `ForNodes` hint.

As with other topology features, there is no easy way for an end user
to reliably confirm that it is working correctly other than by
sniffing the network traffic, or else looking at the logs of each
endpoint to confirm that they are receiving the expected connections
and not receiving unexpected connections.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

The implementation of the feature itself has no SLOs. The effect it
has on the performance of end user workloads that use the feature
depends on those workloads.

> ###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

Reviewer 4: Time to Populate ForNodeHints on the controller manager

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

No (other than that it means people may set `TrafficDistribution` on
Services where they were not previously setting it).

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

No change from existing service/proxy behavior.

###### What are other known failure modes?

None known

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

N/A

## Implementation History

- Initial proposal as `InternalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`: 2021-10-21
- Initial proposal as "Node-level topology": 2022-01-15
- Initial proposal as `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameNode`: 2025-02-06

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

As noted, this is the third attempt at this feature.

> The initial proposal ([#3016]) was for `internalTrafficPolicy:

Reviewer 2: Don't forget `topologyKeys` which allowed users to express a strict or prefer form of this, but also allowed arbitrary silliness.

We will add a new `TrafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameZone`, which
is defined as follows:

* `PreferSameZone`: Indicates a preference for routing traffic to
  endpoints that are in the same zone as the client. In general, the
  proxy should always route to a same-zone endpoint if any is
  available.

And we will say that henceforth, `PreferClose` is just a deprecated
alias for `PreferSameZone`, and never means anything other than
"prefer same zone".

Note that this does not change the existing implementation of
`PreferClose` at all, it only removes the possibility of future
changes.

(In theory, service proxies other than kube-proxy may already have
been implementing `PreferClose` with semantics other than the ones
kube-proxy used. Those implementations will need to be updated when
they add support for this KEP.)

### Addition of `PreferSameNode`

We will add a new `TrafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameNode`, which
is defined as follows:

* `PreferSameNode`: Indicates a preference for routing traffic to
  endpoints that are on the same node as the client. In general, the
  proxy should always route to a same-node endpoint if any is

>   available.

Reviewer 3: How does this field interact with the iTP field? 

I assume that what is written here will also apply to `PreferSameNode`: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/networking/virtual-ips/#interaction-with-traffic-policies

Author: Yes. All topology-ish features should behave the same way with respect to other features; the only difference is which endpoints they pick as "topologically available".

`Local` traffic policy ignores topology, because its own routing concerns render topology irrelevant. But if we added other traffic policy types in the future, they might work differently and we'd have to define that then.

We will add a new field to `discoveryv1.EndpointHints`:

```golang
// EndpointHints provides hints describing how an endpoint should be consumed.
type EndpointHints struct {
        ...

	// forNodes indicates the node(s) this endpoint should be targeted by.
	// +listType=atomic

> 	ForNodes []string `json:"forNodes,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,name=forNodes"`

Reviewer 5: Is the ForNodes field just a slice of strings, whereas the ForZones field is defined as a [slice of ForZone](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.32.1/pkg/apis/discovery/types.go#L134-L145)?

Author: The `ForZone` struct was apparently added to support future ideas like having multiple zones with `weight` values... (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/2433-topology-aware-hints/README.md#future-api-expansion)

I guess we could do the same for `ForNodes`... ? I think the idea of weighted hints is based more on the "smart controllers / ambiguous API" model of TopologyAwareHints, while TrafficDistribution has moved more toward "simple controllers / explicit API" so that sort of future API expansion seems unlikely.

Reviewer 5: As mentioned in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5140#discussion_r1948103197, even if we are in the "smart controllers / ambiguous API" model, actually, there's no need to include weight information in ForZones hints. It’s enough to determine the weight within the service proxy implementation, so it's unnecessary.

However, looking at this wording, it might be difficult to definitively say that a string slice is the best choice...🤷‍♂️ For example, if fields other than `trafficDistribution` are added, allowing users to specify the behavior in more detail, is there a possibility that Hints would need to include additional information?
> Although it is unclear if either expansion will be necessary, the API is designed in a way to make expansions straightforward.

}
```

When updating EndpointSlices, if the EndpointSlice controller sees a
service with `PreferSameNode` traffic distribution, then for each
endpoint in the slice, it will add a `ForNodes` hint including the

> name of the endpoint's node. (The field is an array for future

Reviewer 5: Does 'future extensibility' here mean leaving room to implement safeguards against overload later on (e.g., CPU core-based correction in the Topology Aware Routing)? If the safeguard is intended to distribute the load to other nodes, should we add not only the node where the endpoint resides but also the node names that became candidates as a result of the correction?

Author: No, "future extensibility" means other use cases besides simple "PreferSameNode".

For example, you could theoretically implement "prefer same rack" by manually filling in multiple `ForNodes` values.

Author: (Our assumption has been that if you were going to have some sort of "smart" backoff/fallback behavior, that the behavior would be entirely within the proxy, so nobody would be writing out hints about it. The proxy would just determine that it should avoid Node X and starting using Nodes Y and Z isntead, and then do that.)

to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

N/A

##### Unit tests

Tests of validation, endpointslice-controller, and kube-proxy will be
updated.

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

##### Integration tests

N/A

##### e2e tests

E2E tests will be added similar to existing traffic distribution
tests, to cover the new options.

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag

- Unit tests for API enablement and endpoint selection.

#### Beta

- E2E tests completed and enabled.

#### GA

- Time passes, no major objections

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> No real issues, other than dealing with version skew.

Reviewer 6: I agree it's all standard stuff, but technically you're extending the API (the hints struct), so please elaborate a bit more about it.

### Version Skew Strategy

In skewed clusters, it may not be possible for kube-controller-manager
to set the new EndpointSlice hint, or else kube-proxy may not be able
to see the hint. In this case, the service will fall back to

> perfer-same-zone semantics rather than prefer-same-node. Users can

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure I'm following - if we're not able to set the hints, we can't even fallback to prefer-same-zone - it will fallback to default behavior of "no prefer" at all, no?

Author: The `ForZones` hint is old API, so it will always be able to set that.

avoid problems with this by not using the feature until their cluster
is fully upgraded to a version that supports the feature.

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [X] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: ImprovedTrafficDistribution
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - kube-apiserver
    - kube-controller-manager
    - kube-proxy

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Yes.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

It starts working again.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> No.

Reviewer 6: It's ok for alpha, but can you please add them before we will even target beta? (and add a TODO here)?

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

An initial rollout cannot fail and won't impact already-running
workloads, because at the time of the initial rollout, there cannot

> already be any `PreferSameZone` or `PreferSameNode` services.

Reviewer 6: Well - in some catastrophic scenario you may break endpoint-slice controller (fairly unlikely but not technically impossible).
It still won't impact running workloads, but would affect propagating changes to these.

Author: I feel like there's an implied "if there are bugs in the code then arbitrary bad things might happen"? Like, we could crash all of kcm too, but it doesn't seem right to say "an initial rollout might cause the DaemonSet controller to fail".

A rollback has reasonable fallback behavior (as with downgrades), and
a re-rollout just updates the behavior of existing
`PreferSameZone`/`PreferSameNode` services in the expected way.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

There are no metrics that would inform anyone that the feature was
failing, but since the feature is opt-in, individual users can simply
stop using the feature if it is not working for them.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> No

Reviewer 6: TODO for beta.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Discussion about trying to add "prefer same node" behavior to

> `TrafficDistribution: PreferClose` ([#4931]) led to the conclusion

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
`trafficDistribution: PreferClose` ([#4931]) led to the conclusion
```

that any attempt to change the semantics of `PreferClose` would
inevitably have either too many false positives or too many false
negatives.

Thus, this KEP deprecates `PreferClose` and replaces it with
`PreferSameZone` as a new name for the old behavior. And it adds a new
value, `PreferSameNode`, indicating traffic for a service should
preferentially be routed to endpoints on the same node as the client.

[#4931]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4931

## Motivation

### Goals

- Make `TrafficDistribution` less ambiguous.

- Add a new value to allow configuring a service so that connections
  will be delivered to a local endpoint when possible, and a remote
  endpoint if not.

### Non-Goals

- Actually removing `PreferClose` from the API.

## Proposal

### User Stories

#### `PreferClose` vs `PreferSameZone`

As a user, I want to set up a service to have "prefer same zone"
traffic distribution, and I want to know that _it really does have
"prefer same zone" traffic distribution_. I don't want a "smart" proxy
to decide that I actually meant something else, because I didn't.

#### DNS

> As a cluster administrator, I plan to run a DNS pod on each node, and

Author: Yes... it's under the User Stories heading. (I just didn't number them.)

would like DNS requests from other pods to always go to the local DNS
pod, for efficiency. However, if no local DNS pod is available, DNS
should just go to a remote pod instead so it keeps working. There
should never be enough DNS traffic to overload any one endpoint, so
it's safe to use a TrafficDistribution mode that doesn't worry about
endpoint overload.

### Risks and Mitigations

By "locking down" the meaning of `PreferClose`/`PreferSameZone`, we
potentially limit the ability of future proxies to improve traffic
routing on their own.

However, actually _improving_ traffic routing requires the proxy to

> have more information than `TrafficDistribution` currently provides.

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
have more information than `trafficDistribution` currently provides.
```

they would be very happy with a way to _just_ express "prefer same
zone" without worrying that this might thwart some theoretical future
proxy. (And of course, if it _does_ thwart some theoretical future
proxy, they could just change the Service definition at that point.)

Also, while these alternative traffic distribution modes risk
overloading endpoints if used poorly, the API does not need to assume
that the service proxy is the _only_ component in the system that
cares about balancing endpoint load; the user may be using other APIs
such as Pod Topology Spread Constraints or Horizontal Autoscaling to
ensure that load is handled appropriately, and in those scenarios, the
alternatively traffic distribution modes may be completely safe.

## Design Details

### Renaming/Deprecation of `PreferClose`

KEP-4444 defines `PreferClose` as:

> * `PreferClose`: Indicates a preference for routing traffic to endpoints that
>   are topologically proximate to the client. The interpretation of
>   "topologically proximate" may vary across implementations and could encompass
>   endpoints within the same node, rack, zone, or even region.

> We will add a new `TrafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameZone`, which

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
We will add a new `trafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameZone`, which
```

is defined as follows:

* `PreferSameZone`: Indicates a preference for routing traffic to
  endpoints that are in the same zone as the client. In general, the
  proxy should always route to a same-zone endpoint if any is
  available.

And we will say that henceforth, `PreferClose` is just a deprecated
alias for `PreferSameZone`, and never means anything other than
"prefer same zone".

Note that this does not change the existing implementation of
`PreferClose` at all, it only removes the possibility of future
changes.

(In theory, service proxies other than kube-proxy may already have
been implementing `PreferClose` with semantics other than the ones
kube-proxy used. Those implementations will need to be updated when
they add support for this KEP.)

### Addition of `PreferSameNode`

> We will add a new `TrafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameNode`, which

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
We will add a new `trafficDistribution` value, `PreferSameNode`, which
```

is defined as follows:

* `PreferSameNode`: Indicates a preference for routing traffic to
  endpoints that are on the same node as the client. In general, the
  proxy should always route to a same-node endpoint if any is
  available.

We will add a new field to `discoveryv1.EndpointHints`:

```golang
// EndpointHints provides hints describing how an endpoint should be consumed.
type EndpointHints struct {
        ...

	// forNodes indicates the node(s) this endpoint should be targeted by.
	// +listType=atomic
	ForNodes []string `json:"forNodes,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,name=forNodes"`
}
```

When updating EndpointSlices, if the EndpointSlice controller sees a

> service with `PreferSameNode` traffic distribution, then for each

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
Service with `PreferSameNode` traffic distribution, then for each
```

> endpoint in the slice, it will add a `ForNodes` hint including the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
endpoint in the slice, it computes an internal `ForNodes` hint including the
```

If this isn't an internal detail of kube-controller-manager, I'm puzzled about why https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/endpoint-slices/ doesn't mention either hints or ForNodes.

Author: It doesn't mention `ForNodes` because that field is new in this KEP.

It doesn't mention hints because the "Topology information" subsection of that document apparently never got updated to explain the `TopologyAwareHints` feature... but it's not any more "internal" than anything else in EndpointSlice.

name of the endpoint's node. (The field is an array for future
extensibility, but initially it will always have either 0 or 1
elements.) In addition, it will set the `ForZones` hint as it would
with `TrafficDistribution: PreferClose`, to allow older service
proxies to fall back to at least same-zone behavior.

Kube-proxy's `CategorizeEndpoints` function will be updated as
follows:

>   - If every endpoint has a `ForNodes` hint set, and at least one
>     `ForNodes` hint includes the local node, then the set of
>     "topologically available" endpoints is the set of all endpoints
>     with a `ForNodes` hint that includes the local node.
> 
>   - Otherwise, if every endpoint has a `ForZones` hint set, and at
>     least one `ForZones` hint includes the local node's zone, then the
>     set of "topologically available" endpoints is the set of all
>     endpoints with a `ForZones` hint that includes the local node's
>     zone.
> 
>   - Otherwise, all endpoints are "topologically available".

Reviewer 7: (nit - use italics for concept terms)
```suggestion
  - If every endpoint has a `ForNodes` hint set, and at least one
    `ForNodes` hint includes the local node, then the set of
    _topologically available_ endpoints is the set of all endpoints
    with a `ForNodes` hint that includes the local node.

  - Otherwise, if every endpoint has a `ForZones` hint set, and at
    least one `ForZones` hint includes the local node's zone, then the
    set of topologically available endpoints is the set of all
    endpoints with a `ForZones` hint that includes the local node's
    zone.

  - Otherwise, all endpoints are _topologically available_.
```

existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

N/A

##### Unit tests

Tests of validation, endpointslice-controller, and kube-proxy will be
updated.

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

##### Integration tests

We will add a test that disabling the feature results in the hints
being removed from the EndpointSlice for Services using the new
`TrafficDistribution` values.

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

##### e2e tests

E2E tests will be added similar to existing traffic distribution
tests, to cover the new options.

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

> - Feature implemented behind a feature flag

Author: Indeed. That text is copied straight from the KEP template though.

- Unit tests for API enablement and endpoint selection.

#### Beta

- E2E and Integration tests completed and enabled.

#### GA

- Time passes, no major objections

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> On (initial) upgrade, no Services will be using the new
> `TrafficDistribution` values, so there is nothing to do.
> 
> If the user starts using the new values and then downgrades, the
> EndpointSlice controller will treat the unrecognized
> `TrafficDistribution` value as equivalent to `nil` and remove the
> hints from the slice, causing the Service to effectively fall back to
> "default" traffic distribution. When they re-upgrade, if
> `TrafficDistribution` is still set, the hints will be re-added.

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
On (initial) upgrade, no Services will be using the new
`trafficDistribution` values, so there is nothing to do.

If the user starts using the new values and then downgrades, the
EndpointSlice controller will treat the unrecognized
`trafficDistribution` value as equivalent to `nil` and remove the
hints from the slice, causing the Service to effectively fall back to
"default" traffic distribution. When they re-upgrade, if
`trafficDistribution` is still set, the hints will be re-added.
```

### Version Skew Strategy

> In clusters with an updated kube-apiserver but an old
> kube-controller-manager, users would be able to set the new
> `TrafficDistribution` values on a Service, but those values would not
> be recognized. We avoid this by having the feature available in Alpha
> for one release before enabling it by default in Beta.
> 
> In clusters with an updated kube-apiserver and
> kube-controller-manager, but an old kube-proxy (or a third-party
> service proxy that doesn't know about the new values),
> `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameZone` would still work fine, because
> kube-proxy does not look at the actual `TrafficDistribution` value, it
> only looks at the hints set by kube-controller-manager, which would be
> the same for `PreferSameZone` as they would have been with
> `PreferClose`. For Services with `TrafficDistribution:
> PreferSameNode`, the service proxy would not know about the `ForNodes`
> hint, so it would be unable to provide prefer-same-node semantics, but
> in a multi-zone cluster, kcm would also have set the `ForZones` hint,
> so the Service would at least fall back to prefer-same-zone.
> 
> We are not doing anything to mitigate the kcm/kube-proxy skew problem
> other than providing the same-zone fallback. Users for whom this is
> not sufficient should just not depend on `PreferSameNode` until they
> are sure their cluster is non-skewed.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In clusters with an updated kube-apiserver but an old
kube-controller-manager, users would be able to set the new
`trafficDistribution` values on a Service, but those values would not
be recognized. We avoid this by having the feature available in Alpha
for one release before enabling it by default in Beta.

In clusters with an updated kube-apiserver and
kube-controller-manager, but an old kube-proxy (or a third-party
service proxy that doesn't know about the new values),
`trafficDistribution: PreferSameZone` would still work fine, because
kube-proxy does not look at the actual `trafficDistribution` value, it
only looks at the hints set by kube-controller-manager, which would be
the same for `PreferSameZone` as they would have been with
`PreferClose`. For Services with `trafficDistribution:
PreferSameNode`, the service proxy would not know about the `ForNodes`
hint, so it would be unable to provide prefer-same-node semantics, but
in a multi-zone cluster, kcm would also have set the `ForZones` hint,
so the Service would at least fall back to prefer-same-zone.

We are not doing anything to mitigate the kcm/kube-proxy skew problem
other than providing the same-zone fallback. Users for whom this is
not sufficient should just not depend on `PreferSameNode` until they
are sure their cluster is non-skewed.
```

falling back to the semantics of `TrafficDistribution:
PreferSameZone`.)

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

No (other than that it means people may set `TrafficDistribution` on
Services where they were not previously setting it).

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

No

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

No change from existing service/proxy behavior.

###### What are other known failure modes?

None known

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

N/A

## Implementation History

> - Initial proposal as `InternalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`: 2021-10-21
> - Initial proposal as "Node-level topology": 2022-01-15
> - Initial proposal as `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameNode`: 2025-02-06
> - Added `TrafficDistribution: PreferSameZone`: 2025-02-08

Reviewer 7: (nit)
```suggestion
- Initial proposal as `internalTrafficPolicy: PreferLocal`: 2021-10-21
- Initial proposal as _Node-level topology_: 2022-01-15
- Initial proposal as `trafficDistribution: PreferSameNode`: 2025-02-06
- Added `trafficDistribution: PreferSameZone`: 2025-02-08
```

Author: (FTR, "Node-level topology" is in quotes here because it was title of the PR.)

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

> "Node-level topology" was one of many things that was possible with
> the old [`TopologyKeys`] API, but that API was deprecated because of
> other problems.
> 
> This is the third attempt at "node-level topology" specifically.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
_Node-level topology_ was one of many things that was possible with
the old [`TopologyKeys`] mechanism, but that enhancement to the Service API was deprecated
(and removed) because of other problems.

This is the third attempt at _node-level topology_ specifically.
```
?

Author: I'm not really defining this (or "topologically available") as a "concept" though. Like, if there was a glossary, neither of them would be included there. I'll just remove the quotes.
